In the modern world,
people tend to see religion as an enemy,
as a destructive force that keeps the masses
kind of ignorant.
I also had a totally negative view of religion
until I started to explore Shamanism.
To my surprise, I found that my trips with substances
like ayahuasca, iboga and LSD actually seemed to
confirm the validity of the mystical experience
that religious texts have talked about through the ages.
Tom Roberts argues that the revival of psychedelics
is a second reformation.
Before the first reformation,
the Bible was only in Latin and only
priests could read it.
After Martin Luther, everyone could read the
Word of God and they could learn about the visions
of the prophets for themselves.
When psychedelics became widely available in the 60s,
many people were able to access the same kind of experiences
that the prophets had had.
They would have mystical visions,
attain a sense of unity with the cosmos.
They could even speak to spirits who would
introduce themselves as gods or angels.
So, the question is, could we evolve kind of
a new religious structure that encompasses these
new revelations, or can a new expression
of the religious impulse emerge in our time?
(mystical upbeat music)
(applause)
Hey everybody.
Thank you for checking in with us.
We're here for Mind Shift and today,
we're interviewing the extraordinary
psychedelic visionary artist, Alex Grey,
whose work has become kind of emblematic
or archetypal for Shamanism,
for the psychedelic experience in our time and
Alex and his wife, Allyson Grey are co-founders of
"Cosm," so welcome everybody and welcome to Alex.
Born in Columbus, Ohio in
November, 1953, Alex Grey had an early
fascination with death.
He went to the Columbus College of Art and Design
on a full scholarship but dropped out and
made a living painting billboards.
Fate brought him to Boston and the Museum of Fine Arts.
It was during that time that Alex met the person who
would become his life partner and eventually his wife,
Allyson Grey.
His prolific output of art since then has included
everything from working as a medical illustrator
at Harvard University to perhaps his best-known work,
The Sacred Mirrors.
His paintings have been featured as the album art of
Tool, The Beastie Boys and Nirvana.
On top of this, his art has been featured
in solo exhibitions at Feature Inc,
The Tibet House, Stucks Gallery,
PS One, The Outsider Art Fair,
The New Museum in New York City,
The Grand Palais in Paris and
the Sao Paolo Biennial in Brazil.
In 2011 and 2012, the Watkins Review named him one
of the top twenty spiritual leaders alive,
along with the Dalai Lama, Eckhart Tolle, and Oprah Winfrey.
(applause)
Thank you so much for joining us on Mind Shift.
It's great to see you, as always.
So, maybe start with a little bit about
your early career.
I mean, how does one get to be Alex Grey?
Well, I was born in Columbus, Ohio and
my dad was a commercial graphic artist and
he taught me how to draw.
I loved monsters and I was fascinated with death, actually.
Some of my earliest stuff is all skeletons and things.
What was it about death that you found so interesting?
I think the secession of life, you know?
It was just what happened.
Did you have any idea of anything that
would come after death, or it was just the actual--?
The question of it was unsettling and
draw me toward a very shadowy area, you know?
In the consideration of it.
And of course, I was probably filled with fear about it.
What's the nature of life?
And, I was later on, taking on a lot more
existential attitude of an absurd and materialist
kind of reality.
You know, I was buying into the kind of
reductionist worldview and by the time I was 21,
I was pretty desperate and suicidal even,
and challenged the Almighty to appear if there were
such a thing.
This was when, what, the 70s?
Seventy-five, actually.
75, so you were kind of a little bit past the '60s?
May 30th, yeah.
And yeah and I was just getting out of art school and
I had never tripped before.
Anyway, I was saying goodbye to my professor on
a street corner and this girl drives by and invites me
to her party later that evening.
And, the professor picks me up later that evening
and he has a bottle of Kahlua and LSD, so--
Mixed together or was it a choice, one or the other?
No, together. You know, they were in the same bottle.
This was our professor.
And so, he offered it to me and I had never done it before
so what the hell?
And then I shared the other half of the bottle
with the gal who was throwing the party.
That was Allyson, of course.
That was 38 years ago and it was a revolution
in my consciousness, you know?
From a very dark person, I found the light immediately,
the light of God, the light of love was just around this
kind of corner.
I was in the dark and going toward the light
and it was all the shades of gray that brought
the opposites together and I decided to change
my name to "Grey."
I don't even know what your original, actual
original name was.
It was "Velzy," which is a famous name for surfers
because Dale Velzy was a historic figure
in shaping surfboards.
It probably would have done me some good,
but I changed it to "Grey."
When you say you found the light and
you found God, those are huge statements.
Can you unpack that a little bit?
What does that actually mean?
Well, if I had bought into kind of a
flatland reality, that there was no Creator,
this was a chance occurance that life grew
in the way that it did,
just a collection of random events basically
that lead up to where we are.
Even though, in hindsight that seems completely
unintelligent, that was my attitude and pretty much
a lot of the people that I hung out with and it was
a very cynical attitude, too.
So, the mystical experience kind of
turns that on its head and no longer do you
imagine that reality is composed only of a
material manifestation but an equally infinite terrain
of an inner world and an equally deep and
profound connection with source,
what feels like source reality, happens
and in the wake of a visionary mystical experience,
you're a changed person.
You have a sense that a divine intelligence exists,
that its basis is love and that you are an emanation,
one node,
of an infinitely one intelligence.
So, to have a sense of that without speaking,
and yet suddenly you have a sense of knowing
and comprehension that transcends your,
even your life.
I have one question for you.
In the psychedelic communities that we kind of
both travel in, like the MAPS world and Erowid
and so on,
there are lots of people who have had
profound psychedelic experiences that are
visionary in a certain sense,
but they don't make that jump to believing
there's a divine intelligence.
They see it more as a manifestation of our brain's capacity.
How do you--
I'm sure you know tons of these characters.
How do you explain that they've had the
same experience but they don't interpret it
the same way?
Well, that they buy into a more, I guess,
rationally based altitude on trying to make a call
on whether that's real or not.
By and large, a mystical experience is
just about the most important experience
that people who have had them would say
at least in their lifetime,
the top five experiences of their lifetime,
you know and for many people,
it's profoundly healing.
For me, it was a choice whether I was going to
even "To be or not to be,"
helped to answer that, you know?
How old were you at that point?
Twenty-one.
I see. And the types of work that you are now known for,
it was still a number of years before you arrived
at that work.
Yeah.
Well, I not only, sort of found God in the light
that was just around the bend,
but I found God in the persona of
my partner, Allyson Grey and soon to be my wife.
So, choosing to be together and to continue our
psychedelic sacramental sojourns,
we arrived at the space of infinite love
under the influence of the sort of,
container of our relationship.
So, you talk about a proper set and setting for an opening,
a mystical opening, and you would imagine being supported
by those who love you as being strongly supportive of that.
So, I think that finding Allyson and working together
and having dead on matched mystical experiences
of the universal mind lattice,
that was, for me, that was the deciding thing.
When we had and described and starting drawing
the same exact mystical experiences
completely out of the body,
that was a mystical experience of the light that
really changed us and in reoriented us to
what we're doing now.
There was some point you came into contact also
with Tibetan Buddhist traditions that had an influence also.
Oh, yeah.
When was that?
Around 1980 or so, and '81, we developed a friendship
with Ken Wilbur and so he and some other friends,
Mark Epstein and folks,
had introduced us to Tibetan Buddhism when I was
working in a medical school in the morgue,
and because they knew that I was working with the dead
and they thought that it would be good for me to get a
Tibetan Book of the Dead, and they gave me--
Wasn't there a particular type of Tibeten Buddhist
practice that kind of related to working with corpses
and that kind of interest?
Yes.
What's that called? The Chad practice?
The Chod. Yeah.
Yes, it's a common practice for them to do that in
a charnel ground or in the burial ground.
That particular practice.
Types of meditations? Types of--?
Yes. And it's a way of feeding the all-beings.
It's a special, amazing practice.
Anyway, Ken Wilbur had basically said,
"I know you like all the spiritual paths,
"but chase many rabbits, catch none,
"so why don't you decide on one?"
And so I considered him a real spiritual friend
and big brother and he said just do it.
And then, you'll get the fruit of the practice a little bit
otherwise, just reading books, you're not going to get that.
If you study with a teacher, though,
and really hang out with them and get their transmissions
and do the practices, then you learn something about
the tradition and it's been hugely, deeply impactful.
So, then, is it ongoing practice for you?
Yes, yes, but it's also, it's ultimately the Dzogchen
non-dual tradition would have you embracing
whatever you're doing as part of your contemplation
and your path and to not seek a difference so much
between meditation or contemplation and
your everyday life.
As long as you can stay in some kind of
non-attachment or witness consciousness
or some state?
That's the idea, yeah, yeah.
So, I'm not saying that I'm there,
but it still informs that part of my practice
and I, you know, do go over the basics and Norbu,
Namkhai Norbu is just an amazing teacher,
who is really important for our spiritual development.
Let's talk a little about the LSD as a creative tool.
Obviously, LSD is very much suppressed in our culture
and in a sense, you've been courageous as a kind of
outspoken advocate for that sort of experience.
What do you think of LSD?
Is there a danger to it, are there values to it?
What's kind of it's--
obviously, it erupted in the mid-century into
the modern Western psyche,
discovered by Albert Hoffman,
like, what is this stuff?
(chuckles)
Well, of course, my interpretation of LSD,
which is celebrating seventy years of age this past April.
April 19th, 1943 when Albert Hoffman took the first dose.
I feel like it was a historic and transcendental
moment of humanity.
I think of it as a religious moment.
I think that Albert heard an angel calling him
to mix up LSD because it caused a consciousness
revolution that we're still in the waves and paroxysms of.
What it did was to bring actual sacrament back
to the human experience of
Westernized white people who believe in science
no longer religion and anybody who has visions
is obviously hallucinating and perhaps psychotic,
maybe ought to be locked up and so,
in that kind of world,
when Hoffman, a scientist, brings forward a sacrament
that electrifies the mind and opens us up
to actual God Consciousness,
even if it's just a glimpse, you know?
The miracle of the psychedelic sacrament is something
that has been known about of course for millennia and
was at the actual cradle of both eastern and
western civilization and is certainly so important
to the Aztec and Mayan culture as well.
Actually, the old time religion was a sacramental religion.
You are talking about, of course, these are theories?
No, no no.
This is science.
The mysteries of Eleusis?
Yeah, the kykeon.
The Greek mysteries.
It was the state religion for over a thousand years
there was a psychedelic culture.
You know, that's how Socrates and Aristotle
and all of them, they were tripping.
We don't know exactly what the components were
of that potion.
No, but it was obviously a way to connect them with
the divine in the same way that soma was a plant
sacrament that allowed the plant practitioners
to connect with a divine reality.
So, we have soma and the kykeon, two sacramets
at the cradle of eastern and western civilization.
So, it was a sacramental religion and
it was a real sacrament,
that is it got you to a state of connection
with sacred reality.
So, I think that with the re-emergence of LSD and
that leading then to the psilocybin from
Gordon Wasson and Maria Sabina,
the connection with the Central and
South American traditions and all the rest of this.
This is bringing forward actual sacrament again,
which humanity, except for the last few hundred years,
it's been suppressed.
And what's been the influence of these kind of experiences
for you on your art?
It seems as if in your work you paint kind of
energy bodies, chakra systems.
Are these all things that you've kind of visualized
during visionary states?
Yes and some of them are more adaptations and
adoptions of some of the light body yogic material.
I don't know every acupuncture meridian and point
just in my memory and things like that but I try to
weave in Eastern and Western medical understanding
about the body.
So, it's trying to remap our understanding that there is
a subtle energetic system that is part of our body,
a subtle body as well.
I wanted to ask you why, on the one hand, your work
is not taken seriously in the canonical mainstream art world
but on the other hand, it's been such an inspiration,
especially for young people,
kind of like a global youth culture.
How do you see that dichotomy and
what do you feel about that?
Well, it's an interesting phenomena.
I think it's an actual phenomena because there
are, worldwide, there's festival culture.
You're frequently, we meet you on the road
in Timbuktu or Australia or wherever.
So, all over the world there are tripping young people
who appear at festivals having an enormous amount
of fun and inspiration together.
And, this is a the visionary art phenomena has been
bonded with this festival culture and with millions of
people worldwide.
So, I'm seeing it in some ways as the kind of
folk art of this tribe, which we've loosely called
The Love Tribe, just because it is an expression
of a commonly understood consciousness.
As an expression of this special and
sacramental consciousness,
it's united like a kind of sacred art with a population
and a community.
And so, in some ways, because people have been
tattooed all over with my artwork and in some ways,
does that not stand up to a New York Times Review?
You don't go after copyright infringement if
they've got the tattoos?
(laughter)
No, we let them do that.
It's awesome.
It's a walking kind of testimonial for the
impact of the work and it's mostly people who
have been validated in their own sacramental journeying
by the visionary art.
And that's why there's a connection between the community
for whom it matters and
I would argue that it's also connected with the
emergence of a planetary civilization,
because it's happening worldwide,
it's a return to the sacrament that's at the foundation
of both Eastern and Western civilization and
we're looking for a mystic core for a planetary civilization
because where else are we going?
We're kind of already there in some people's
global citizenry.
But, more and more, the internet is interconnecting us
and I think it's a very exciting time.
Thank you so much for joining us for this little dialogue.
(applause)
We'll be right back with
Michael Mohammed Knight,
author of "Tripping with Allah,"
and then we'll have Alex back on to have
a little trialogue with Michael.
So, thank you so much.
(applause)
After a troubled childhood,
Michael Mohammed Knight converted to Islam
at the age of 15 and at 17 went to Islamabad, Pakistan
to study the religion.
In 2002, Knight wrote "The Taqwacores,"
about a Muslim punk rock group.
Professor of Islamic Studies at the
University of North Carolina, Carl W. Ernst,
called the novel,
"A Catcher in the Rye for young Muslims."
The book also spawned a film adaptation and
the start of the Muslim punk scene in the United States.
His most recent book, "Tripping with Allah:
"Islam, Drugs and Writing,"
details his experiences from an Islamic point of view
with the Shamic medicine ayahuasca.
The San Francisco Chronicle describes him as
one of the most necessary and, paradoxically enough,
hopeful writers of Barack Obama's America.
(applause)
Hey there, welcome back.
This is Mind Shift with Daniel Pinchbeck and I'm here
with Michael Mohammed Knight.
Great to meet you.
Yeah, Michael, so you're prolific.
You've written numerous tomes of various lengths.
Tell me a little bit about your introduction to Islam
and how you kind of ended up taking this path.
I'm kind of a weird guy.
This starts when I was 15,
a really mixed up kid writing letters to Charles Manson.
He wrote back, by the way, so I was like
Charles Manson's pen pal at one point.
At the same time I got into Malcolm X.
This is the same time in the early 90s
when Malcolm X's presence in pop culture
was just all over the place.
I think Bill Clinton wore an X hat when he was running.
It was at that level and there are a lot of X references
in hip-hop and I was just a wounded,
angst-ridden 15 year old.
Upstate New York?
Upstate New York, yeah.
The Finger Lakes area.
I was looking for a way to rebuild myself and
not the the 15 year old kid who
writes letters to Charles Manson.
Malcolm promised me something,
a way of reconstructing myself, a way of constructing
a certain kind of masculinity and because Islam was
the portal through which he found himself,
naturally I kind of gravitated towards Islam and
when I was 16, I went to a mosque and
officially became Muslim.
Two months out of my senior year in high school,
in Pakistan studying Islam.
How frequently, how often--
are you from a Christian background?
A white Christian background?
Yeah.
Is it that frequent that people from
that background are jumping into Islam right now?
Yeah, I grew up Catholic, kind of nominally Catholic
and I thought my story was really strange at the time.
In the years since, as I've traveled and kind of
put my own story out there,
I will tell you that at that particular moment
in American history. found Malcolm X,
found the secret Islamic component of hip-hop
and went on similar paths as mine,
with the various ups and down, with the kind of
zealous conversions and heartbreaking disillusionments
and the in-between spaces,, too.
You ultimately, you went to Pakistan and ultimately
you involved with the Sufi order, is that correct?
In the course of my travels, I've had instersections
with Sufism.
There's a Sufi order that I took initiation into and
I've dabbled in various other kind of expressions
of Sufism but Sufism is kind of a big,
a big construct.
There's a lot of stuff and I've done a little
bit of wandering in it, yeah.
I guess just from my perspective of not knowing
too much, I see Sufism as sort of the esoteric aspect
of Islam, kind of like Kabbalah is for Christianity
or something like that.
That's certainly there.
There's also Sufis who are very kind of Sharia-compliant
very kind of rigid and disciplined in their practices too.
There's a wide spectrum within Sufi tradition.
There are Sufi groups in certain times and places
in history where they would walk around naked
and spread ashes on their body and smoke weed all day.
Like the Savvis in India?
Islam intersected with all these things and
Islamic tradition, what we call Sufism specifically,
has taken on all kinds of different shapes.
So tell me a little bit more about,
Islam often has a very negative connotation
in sort of mainstream culture in the US.
As somebody who has sort of delved deeply
and penetrated deeply into it,
can you explicate your own impressions
and what you've kind of discovered in your path?
My answer is always kind of the deconstructive move
because there are people who would claim a particular
essence for Islam as being the most rigid,
and intolerant and legally oriented and
blindly ritualistic and blindly misogynistic
kind of tradition and this is something constant
and unchanging throughout history.
Then, there's people who, justifiably so, take exception
to that kind of essentialism and they construct
a counter-essence.
Islam has always been liberatory and poetic and wonderful.
Who is an example of the second?
There's all kind of reformist voices and not just
public intellectuals but just everyday Muslims trying
to relocate what Islam means for them.
So, people might pull towards--
Sufi tradition is often a means where people create
this counter-essence, referring to people like
Willmi or Hallaj or Abenel Arabi.
People like that.
But for me, it's all Islam.
It's all Islamic tradition.
So, I don't claim it as essence.
I don't claim that there's this one unchanging
character to Islam and that bothers a lot of people.
They want there to be--
of course we know what Islam is.
It's very evident that we know what Islam is.
Some people argue that fundamentalism in general
is more of a post-modern phenomenon?
That the kind of rigid contructs in Christian fundamentalism
or Islamic fundamentalism are more like things that happened
as a result of modern progress and pop media and
all this kind of stuff that kind of forced all these groups
to construct a more rigid identity.
Sure, sure.
There's a couple of things that have been happening.
In the late 19th century, you can look at
what Buddhists were doing.
Japanese Buddhists are saying we need to get rid
of all these cultural accumulations and return
to the true Buddhism of the Buddha and wash away
all these superstitions and folk religious type thing
and Hindus are saying the same thing at the same time
in different places and Muslims were doing that too.
Muslims were saying we need to separate true, pure
original Islam from all of these cultural
expressions of Islam and we need to go back to
what the prophet originally brought us.
So, they are all doing the same thing in different ways
so it very much--
you know, ironically, the call to go back to the origins
and shed all of this cultural accumulation,
it's part of its time and place.
You know, in some of your books it seems like you
actually do identify a lot with the figure of
Mohammed himself, I mean,
you discuss him a lot.
In the recent book,
"Tripping with Allah,"
which obviously is one that is germane to my interests.
Can you explain to me a little bit about
how you consider Mohammed to be kind of an
important figure for you at this time?
I've had a very long and complex relationship to Mohammed
just because people make so many different choices
in how they represent him.
So, part of my own journey and it's taken a long time
and a lot of books to kind of figure this
one out for myself,
was finding Mohammed as kind of a visualization
of my ideal,
not my ideal self but a self to strive towards.
Just my idea of a perfect humanity.
What qualities of Mohammed do you find have that?
His kindness, his patience, his care.
The way that he becomes kind of a template
for myself.
I can look at stories of how he treated people and
see that as something I can attain towards,
and something that I don't live up to.
For example, a story as simple as he was in the mosque,
and there is a Bedouin who walks into the the mosque
and doesn't understand Mohammed's concept of modesty
and even basic hygiene and cleanliness and
the Bedouin just starts urinating in
the middle of the mosque.
And people are ready to kill him.
All the prophet's companions who understand how the prophet
felt about these kind of things.
They want to kill this man.
And Mohammed's like,
"Oh, let him go. Just pour water on it.
"He'll be fine, he doesn't know what he's doing."
And in my life, in all of our experiences,
we can find people who are pissing on what
we find sacred.
This was a mosque, this man's pissing in the mosque
and Mohammed gave better care to that man
then I generally do when people piss on the things
that I care about.
Similarly, I've written a lot of controversial things
and offensive things and I've found Muslims
acting out that story with me,
because in some of the things that I say,
I'm basically urinating in the mosque.
I'm taking things that people care about and challenging
them sometimes very disrespectfully and provocatively so.
There are people who still call me their brother after
that experience.
That's how I should be living out the example of Mohammed.
What are some examples of these areas that
are so controversial that you delve into?
Part of it is the person Mohammed himself.
There's a lot of different stories about Mohammed.
They're not all flattering.
They're not all positive.
There's a lot of different ways that people
choose to wrestle with those stories.
But, at different times in my life,
I would kind of take the punk role,
tear everything down.
He's like the big patriarch and I'm kind of
doing this whole "murder the father" thing with him
and a lot of people take offense to that
because he's someone who is very dear to people.
I'm super-psyched to get into your--
let's start with that, actually,
Tell me a little bit about what drew you
to ayahuasca and how you kind of
how you felt that you could kind of
synthesize that interest with Islam in some sense.
It's probably what I needed at that particular time.
I have a long story with Islam, with my life as a Muslim
and I've had experiences that I consider to be
profoundly spiritual, even approaching visionary
experiences and then--
Like what?
Well, for example, I went to Mecca in 2008
and there is an immense sensory overload
in the experience of going to Mecca.
Just the masses of people and the--
Just for people who don't know, my understanding
is the Kaaba, the rock itself, is a meteorite?
Is that correct?
I don't think we're ever going to have the opportunity
to put it under scientific examination but that's
what's been theorized.
Because the narrative is that the stone comes from Heaven,
so I think that if this was a stone that people experienced
at one time as coming from the sky then it was most
likely a meteorite.
And everyone moves around it obviously in a
certain direction.
There's a ritual called tawaf where people walk around
the kaaba which houses the stone.
And is there an esoteric understanding of
what, of the kind of future condition of,
the results of this constant practice of putting energy in
towards this particular manifestation?
I would say that there's been a wide variety
of interpretations and there are people who do esoteric
interpretations of it.
The main thing for me as I engaged in the pilgrimage
is this is something you need to do.
This is part of the life of a Muslim and,
for me particularly, it's part of walking in Mohammed's
footsteps and it's not just the experience of
the individual with God,
because people do, they obviously they go to Mecca
and they seek that encounter with God,
that direct experience of the divine,
but one thing I was looking for was an experience
with people, that I'm a Muslim and I have this very
angsty, alien relationship to many Muslim communities
and the people in those communities and
I'm trying to find myself as a Muslim on this planet,
in my own lifetime.
So, part of the experience of Mecca for me
was reconciling myself to the extreme diversity,
the vast diversity of Muslims,
because there's a lot of good in that
and there's a lot of problems, as is any tradition.
But, to a certain extent, it was something you experienced
subjectively as a visionary or mystical,
did it have that dimension to it?
It was walking around the Kaaba itself.
There's a lot of off times.
I was there for three weeks.
There were times when I'm in this mass complex
that the Saudi state is built around the Kaaba.
There's escalators and all kinds of ceiling fans.
It's a very modern kind of construction.
I would just sit on the cool marble floor at night and
just space out and the context of spacing out in that
place that I have internalized as a sacred place,
I did let my thoughts kind of go and it's not like
a hallucination or something where I'm losing
awareness of where I am but I am kind of going
into places in my head and part of it was
these kind of encounters with Ishmael,
the son of Abraham who was central to the
story of the Kaaba.
So, I had those kinds of experiences at the Kaaba
and at other places and then I kind of go into
grad school and I start studying religion in a very
academic way and that cuts off.
So, what I was looking for with ayahuasca
was kind of a way to get that up again,
be more engaged from the gut.
In the book, you go over the whole history
of the relationship between Islam and all sorts of
different drugs and psychoactives and so on.
Did that research provide kind of a safe ground,
a foundation for you to then have that type of
an exploration?
Absolutely, because the first question for a
project about Islamic drugs is what does Islam
say about drugs?
What does the Koran say?
What does the prophet say?
And just kind of destabilizing the answers the people give
to those questions allowed me a little bit of space
to engage myself and to find my own answer.
So, tell me a little bit about your encounters
with ayahuasca.
I had three.
The first was very unfulfilling.
That was with the Daime?
Yeah I went with the Santo Daime and
they are very nice people.
Santo Daime is a religion from Brazil
that uses ayahuasca as a sacrament,
kind of a synchretic mixture of Christian and
Indian elements.
They were very welcoming.
I have nothing but positive things to say
about the people that kind of opened that door for me,
but I am very much a Muslim and my symbolic language
that I've internalized and that I think in is a
Muslim language.
So, I'm going to this Daime ceremony and
it's very explicitly Christian.
There's pictures of Jesus and we're singing
Christian hymns in Portuguese and stuff.
I couldn't make that work for me.
I couldn't--
Sounds like it wasn't such strong medicine also.
Yeah, it might have been that aspect, too.
I just couldn't make it my own.
My second time trying it,
I didn't have the DMT agent,
I'm just drinking the vine itself.
That's a good opportunity to vomit a lot.
That didn't even end up happening.
I'm at a counter-terrorism conference and
I have the vine and I go during the breaks
between panels and I have a coffee maker
and I pour the hot water in and I'm just
kind of vining out with all these CIA agents.
That's very Hunter S. Thompson of you.
(laughter)
That's what they say.
So, I didn't have--
I had a good time.
I went back to the room they gave me
and I'm just kind of vining out but
the third time was at a ceremony in Southern California
and it was with a classically trained Shaman and
there was no kind of doctrinal component to it
that I had to sign on to.
In other words, there
was no very "we're Christian and you're doing
"a Christian thing here."
There was no kind of shared singing or anything like that.
You go up to the Shaman and he gives you
your medicine and you just go back into your corner.
You have your sleeping bag and you have your bucket
in case you need it and you just close your eyes
and you're just there.
There's some kind of, there's breathing and
there's music and stuff but that's what I need it to be.
It sounds from the book like you had a profound
visionary experience in that setting.
Yeah.
It terms of, I don't like words like
"orthodoxy" and "heterodoxy" and "heresy"
but it was off the chart heterodox heretical.
Part of what I went into it expecting or
trying to prepare for was an encounter
with the divine in feminine form.
I had been lead to expect that this kind of
happens a lot with people drinking the medicine.
So, being a Muslim and trying to find a way into that,
I looked to Mohammed's daughter, Fatima,
as my window through to that.
So, I have with me dust from Kaaba
and the rock where Fatima's son,
the prophet's grandson was brutally murdered
and I ingest that dust, so I'm ingesting the blood
of Fatima's son, Hussein, before I take the medicine.
So, there's this kind of, this is how I'm prepping myself
and I just say
(speaking foreign language)
"My Lord, increase me in knowledge,"
and I just go vibe out and I have my encounter
with Fatima and I'm not committed to the idea
that this is something outside of me,
beaming down to me or anything like that,
but yeah, I had my encounter with Fatima.
And it had a whole sexual dimension to it.
There was.
I feel like there was a purging of kind of masculine
poison, not just exclusively Muslim masculinity,
just growing up as a boy in America and
ingesting that kind of masculinity also.
It comes in the form of Fatima and not only do I
have these very kind of explicit encounter with
Fatima herself but I become Fatima at one point.
And, as Fatima, I have sex with Ali, her husband,
who is extraordinarily important in Islamic tradition.
I'm experiencing sort of a superior masculinity in Ali
as Fatima and with Fatima, when I'm myself,
she's naked and she tells me,
she puts my hand on her and says,
"This is the door to the mosque."
All the masculine, the religious stuff, the legal traditions
and the books and the mosques and all that,
it's trying to replicate the womb,
like this is the real power, this is where the mosque is.
So just that kind of that experience.
There was a lot of purging of boy pain, you know.
Why didn't you continue with ayahuasca after that?
Part of it is just a matter of the portals that I have
access to like I am open to it, I'm not against it.
I had an extraordinary experience with it,
I'm not opposed to doing it again.
There's a sense that the visionary experience
always threatens any construct of a religion
or any structure that anyone is trying to hold,
because it's like this upsurge from this
transcendental domain.
Do you feel like there is a path there,
that ayahuasca might shake down certain structures?
Absolutely, because people want their religious bodies
to be consistent.
We want to be able to make an argument using our shared text
that we are all referring to and to argue rationally
about what the words say.
These questions are always thrown at Islam.
Does the Koran advocate violence?
Does the Koran advocate a misogynist patriarchy?
All these kinds of questions.
We want to be able to go to the book and
flip through it and find a verse and
prove rationally using the text
that the text says something and
absolutely this medicine and
other kinds of experiences like that
destabilize that because you have a source
outside the text, a new filter, a new lens
through which you're reading the text,
so there's definitely that component of
kind of tearing apart the construction
that we're building with.
Cool.
Thank you so much, Michael.
(applause)
It was great to talk to you.
So, we'll be right back with
Alex and Michael.
(applause)
Hi, everybody, welcome back.
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck here
with Mind Shift and I'm here with
Alex Grey and Michael Mohammed Knight.
I thought it was kind of a unique and interesting
opportunity to discuss psychedelics and religion
and the future of religion perhaps.
I know you guys met backstage and
we were discussing kind of is there an opportunity
to kind of revitalize kind of the traditional
religious institutions with the type of
sacramental visionary experience that
sort of erupted back in the consciousness
of the modern West over the later half of
the 20th Century and into today.
So I'll throw that out to you guys and
I'm curious to hear your different perspective.
Well, in a conversation with an ayayhuasca user
who, with their group, experienced being in
the Jewish temple where they also participated
and were part of that community,
they were able to use the temple and it conferred
an entirely new heart connection with the mystic core
of their tradition and that was because of
the sacred context that was supporting that
connection and of course, their complete
attitude of
taking in the sacred context and specifically
doing it there so there is the possibility that
a true sacrament, which would wake people up
to divinity, which is at the core of all world wisdom
traditions might reignite or renew
a kind of mystic connection.
Just to back up a little bit.
Just to go over a little bit of history of ayahuasca.
So, in the 60s, the late 60s, the 70s,
all the psychedelic compounds were made
highly illegal and characterized as Schedule 1.
Peyote, however, having an exemption with
the Native American church,
that the Supreme Court tried to take away from them
I think in the early 90s, and tried to make it
a State by State issue.
This lead to kind of uproars as I remembered,
and Congress was kind of pressured to
issue an Emergency Religious Freedom
Proclaimation Act which protected
the use of peyote by members of
the Native American church.
Then, that was used as a precedent
for ayahuasca.
First of all, the religion, there's two main syncretic
religions from Brazil that use ayahuasca as a sacrament,
Uniao do Vegetalis and Santo Daime.
The UdV managed to win a Supreme Court case
protecting the use of their sacrament,
so there's now chapters of the UdV that are legally
sanctioned, opening up in different cities in the US.
The second church is Santo Daime,
which is the one that I've experienced and
it sounds like you also and maybe you as well.
I've done UdV.
Okay.
They won a major Federal case in Oregon and it seems
likely or possible that that practice could also become
protected, just to give you a little background and context
to where we're at right now.
So, what are your thoughts?
Could there be an enthiogenic reformation
or renovation of traditional religious structures,
like Islam?
Speaking purely from my own experience,
the day after my intense encounter with the medicine
when I had my Fatima vision and all that,
the next day I went to the mosque.
You know, the medicine's still in there.
I didn't throw up and it didn't come out the other end,
and I'm doing everything by the book.
I'm going in there more or less with all the
appearances of a conservative Muslim.
My internal understanding and the way
I'm processing it might be different.
So, even if it's something that was wildly subversive
and heretical and challenging to what my sisters
and brothers in the mosque would have seen as legitimate,
the medicine still actually connected me to
them in new ways.
After I came home, I was going to pretty
conservative mosques and just reading it differently,
feeling it differently.
So, I think as different people encounter this and
run it through their own lives,
something can actually,
it can definitely happen.
I don't know if it's a revitalization of tradition.
I think it will be something new.
We're all kind of swimming in the fishbowl
of our time and place.
So, it will be something that's rooted
in our own experience and not just
things that came before us.
Yeah, I think there's a lot of potential
for things to happen.
I was interested when you discussed
your ayahuasca experience that you said
it was very much an experience of the
divine feminine.
Obviously, in terms of contemporary critiques
of Islam, one of the main common complaints
is the sense that women are quite subjugated or
their role is secondary in the religion and
what we're seeing in the contemporary
psychedelic world is very much kind of
this construct of the return of the divine feminine.
So I thought it would be interesting to get
both of you to talk about that a little bit.
Yeah, I mean certainly I wouldn't pinpoint
Islam as the one religion that gets gender wrong,
because not only is Islam historically unstable itself
but certainly Christianity and some Asian religions and
Buddhism, you know, everything has some kind of
gender issue.
But, absolutely, I was interested in the medicine
as purging some of my masculine stuff.
Not just from my Muslim experience but
being an American boy raised on
pro wrestling and GI Joe and He-Man and all that.
Yeah, I was looking at Fatima as being a feminine voice
because the Koran, it does, to me--
There are some distinctions, I would think,
between the way the subjugation of women
in Judeo-Christian cultures and Islam,
people would make some distinctions, no?
I mean, again, I wouldn't speak to Islam
as being a singular construct,
or the separate kind of Judeo-Christian
thing either but--
Is it an example, in Islam, of a subculture
where the feminine and the masculine
are more perfectly balanced?
I don't know if that exists anywhere.
(laughter)
But for me, as a reader of the Koran,
my eyes and my ears I find the Koran
speaking with a male voice.
That was an issue for me.
I wanted to see if there could be
a space for a feminine voice.
During my vision, my encounter,
you know vision isn't always the right word
because it wasn't just my eyes.
I asked Fatima, "You know, what about the Koran?"
The Koran says this and this and this and
what do I do with that?
And she says,
"That's for the boys,
"you just stay with me.
"The Koran is for the boys, you just stick with me."
That was an Islamic experience for me.
It wasn't textual.
She was walking me away from the text for a moment,
but to me, I'm a Muslim experiencing Fatima.
How to you situate that experience?
You say, from your perspective, was that a divine encounter?
What that an act of creative imagination
where you were kind of like,
in a sense making up a script and the astral energies
were allowing you to kind of build that script up
into some kind of direct perception?
It could be both and like I say,
I'm not committed to the idea that it
has to have come from outside of me to
be worthwhile for me.
But, in terms of trying to contextualize it
within the Islamic tradition,
there ought to be,
there ought to be also laws, attributes
not manifesting, that might be the wrong word
but expressed through creation and
there is a gender component to that
and we already talked that
men and women could recognize a law
in each other.
Different attributes.
There's a story of the prophet.
The prophet said,
"The best of you is the one who is
"best to his wife and I'm the best
"of you because I am the best to my wives."
And that's because he saw kind of the
divine attributes in his wives--
How many did he have again?
There's debate.
There's debate about that because
there's questions of what constitutes a wife.
Five to ten? 15 to 20?
Not twenty but there are different estimates.
What are your thoughts on that?
Divine feminine, re-emergence and how
maybe that plays a part?
In reading, there is a discussion of
the divine feminine as kind of the creatrix and
as you were saying, the gender bias of
creative imagination might be toward the divine feminine
because it's a birthplace of new insight and transformation.
The creative imagination is evolution in process
and spirit is genderless or beyond gender,
but it's also coming into form and in our visions
it's a way of the symbolic imagination and infinite
interdimensional nodes to come forward in a moment,
in an icon,
and this is what the sacrament does.
It allows people to have contact with this
iconic visionary dimension and so,
the symbolism, whether it was purely
coming up in the magic 8-ball of your
unconscious superconsciousness,
ultimately, what you're also learning
is that we're all interconnected so
it's pretty hard to draw those boundaries exactly.
So, there's infusions of energies of all kinds
and the divine feminine becomes a symbol of balance
for our era of overpaternalizing so the rise of the feminine
is an evolutionary force.
The equalization or the harmonization,
the union of the opposites,
is ultimately the way our species and all healing
takes place in the coming together
of opposites.
Something I heard you speaking about,
maybe remembered my kind of in a sense,
pessimism about religion as a forward-going construct
it seems like there's always the visionary experience,
the upsurge of that and that needs to take a form
or a structure which tends to blockade or obstruct
the next wave that wants to obliterate that structure
and start again.
Could you construct, theoretically, a religion
or a form of esoteric expression that allowed
for this constant transmutation or transformation?
I think there's a lot of possibilities and certainly
religion itself is not a historically stable construct
in the sense that there's always been this thing--
History.
Yes, absolutely.
So, I think that absolutely as more and more people
are dissatisfied with how religion is often
conceptualized as this kind of organized
self-contained entity with very clear rules and
regulations and hierarchies,
certainly there's a lot of people that don't want that.
They want something.
You actually wrote about that a little bit,
about Islam itself.
In earlier phases, you could be Hindu and Islam
and Buddhist and Islam,
like these things kind of interpenetrated.
Well, there are certain times and places,
for example, Colonial South Asia,
when the British would take
a census in a particular region
to see who was Hindu,
who was Muslim and the numbers would
add up to more than 100% because
people just didn't understand religion,
they didn't conceptualize religion in the way that
Western Europeans did.
"Of course you can't be Muslim and Hindu,
"That makes no rational sense."
People didn't necessarily conceptualize it that way
and there were people in Southeast Asia
who saw Ali, Fatima's husband, as Vishnu.
They saw him as the same entity and there
was no kind of illogical problem with that.
So, we'd be better off making less sense?
I don't know that it's less rational.
I mean, it didn't satisfy a certain idea--
Absolutely, I get what you're saying.
Cool.
It's a visionary logic.
Very quickly, I wanted to maybe touch on,
in our last few minutes here,
kind of art, counterculture.
I know you've written about William Burroughs
and you kind of came out of kind of the 70s
performance art kind of age of
transgressive performance and so on.
What do you see?
Do you see active countercultures now and
what do you see the value of those types of
more transgressive expressions?
I think that the shadow will always have a form.
Right now, the corporate media,
I think, is a dominant shadow force.
So the alternative media forces will
find unique little pockets of minds
who are trying to undo the shackles
of corporate shrill advertising,
you know,
selling us on fear and death.
So, yes, there are also numerous artists
who will continue to engage that.
I think all of these are necessary.
We have to address and continually
examine our shadow element.
But, to focus only on it is to short the
other side of the coin.
That's to say there is no Heaven,
there's only Hell.
I think that a media that points toward
the internal infinite and the thing that binds
the different world wisdom traditions.
This is what we're looking for in the future,
a universal kind of spirituality and this is
why the Dalai Lama was promoting that idea.
What about you? How would you see it?
I want to be more optimistic than I am.
Optimistic about what?
The potential for spaces and kind of
being productive in the shadows.
This thing that we call Islam that
we think is stable and consistent
and very by the book throughout time
that there are shadows within that
and that you could be in the shadows of Islam
and be in the shadows of quote-unquote
"The West,"
and that there's a lot of space for creativity
and personal autonomy in that.
We'll see.
Well, thank you guys so much.
It's great to have you here on Mind Shift
and I hope you guys will both come back
and visit us again.
(applause)